Title: Data engineeringSummary: Data engineering refers to the building of systems to enable the collection and usage of data. This data is usually used to enable subsequent analysis and data science; which often involves machine learning. Making the data usable usually involves substantial compute and storage, as well as data processing and cleaning.Sections:   - History: Around the 1970s/1980s the term information engineering methodology (IEM) was created to describe database design and the use of software for data analysis and processing. These techniques were intended to be used by database administrators (DBAs) and by systems analysts based upon an understanding of the operational processing needs of organizations for the 1980s. In particular, these techniques were meant to help bridge the gap between strategic business planning and information systems. A key early contributor (often called the "father" of information engineering methodology) was the Australian Clive Finkelstein, who wrote several articles about it between 1976 and 1980, and also co-authored an influential Savant Institute report on it with James Martin. Over the next few years, Finkelstein continued work in a more business-driven direction, which was intended to address a rapidly changing business environment; Martin continued work in a more data processing-driven direction. From 1983 to 1987, Charles M. Richter, guided by Clive Finkelstein, played a significant role in revamping IEM as well as helping to design the IEM software product (user data), which helped automate IEM.
In the early 2000s, the data and data tooling was generally held by the information technology (IT) teams in most companies. Other teams then used data for their work (e.g. reporting), and there was usually little overlap in data skillset between these parts of the business.
In the early 2010s, with the rise of the internet, the massive increase in data volumes, velocity, and variety led to the term big data to describe the data itself, and data-driven tech companies like Facebook and Airbnb started using the phrase  data engineer. Due to the new scale of the data, major firms like Google, Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Microsoft, and Netflix started to move away from traditional ETL and storage techniques. They started creating data engineering, a type of software engineering focused on data, and in particular infrastructure, warehousing, data protection, cybersecurity, mining, modelling, processing, and metadata management. This change in approach was particularly focused on cloud computing. Data started to be handled and used by many parts of the business, such as sales and marketing, and not just IT.   - Tools:    - Lifecycle:    - Roles:    - See also: Big data
Information technology
Software engineering
Computer science   - References:    - Further reading:    - External links: 
The Complex Method IEM
Rapid Application Development
Enterprise Engineering and Rapid Delivery of Enterprise Architecture