Title: Data collectionSummary: Data collection or data gathering is the process of gathering and measuring information on targeted variables in an established system, which then enables one to answer relevant questions and evaluate outcomes. Data collection is a research component in all study fields, including physical and social sciences, humanities, and business. While methods vary by discipline, the emphasis on ensuring accurate and honest collection remains the same. The goal for all data collection is to capture quality evidence that allows analysis to lead to the formulation of convincing and credible answers to the questions that have been posed. Data collection and validation consists of four steps when it involves taking a census and seven steps when it involves sampling.Regardless of the field of or preference for defining data (quantitative or qualitative), accurate data collection is essential to maintain research integrity. The selection of appropriate data collection instruments (existing, modified, or newly developed) and delineated instructions for their correct use reduce the likelihood of errors.
A formal data collection process is necessary as it ensures that the data gathered are both defined and accurate. This way, subsequent decisions based on arguments embodied in the findings are made using valid data. The process provides both a baseline from which to measure and in certain cases an indication of what to improve.Sections:   - Data management platform: Data management platform (DMP) is a centralized storage and analytical system for data. Mainly used by marketers, DMPs exist to compile and transform large amounts of data into discernible information. Marketers may want to receive and utilize first, second and third-party data. DMPs enable this, because they are the aggregate system of DSPs (demand side platform) and SSPs (supply side platform). When it comes to advertising, DMPs are integral for optimizing and guiding marketers in future campaigns. This system and their effectiveness is proof that categorized, analyzed, and compiled data is far more useful than raw data.   - Data integrity issues: The main reason for maintaining data integrity is to support the observation of errors in the data collection process. Those errors may be made intentionally (deliberate falsification) or non-intentionally (random or systematic errors).There are two approaches that may protect data integrity and secure scientific validity of study results invented by Craddick, Crawford, Rhodes, Redican, Rukenbrod and Laws in 2003:

Quality assurance – all actions carried out before data collection
Quality control – all actions carried out during and after data collection   - See also:    - References:    - External links: 
All about data collection – TechTarget.com