Title: Data modelingSummary: Data modeling in software engineering is the process of creating a data model for an information system by applying certain formal techniques.Sections:   - Overview: Data modeling is a process  used to define and analyze data requirements needed to support the business processes within the scope of corresponding information systems in organizations. Therefore, the process of data modeling involves professional data modelers working closely with business stakeholders, as well as potential users of the information system.
There are three different types of data models produced while progressing from requirements to the actual database to be used for the information system.  The data requirements are initially recorded as a conceptual data model which is essentially a set of technology independent specifications about the data and is used to discuss initial requirements with the business stakeholders. The conceptual model is then translated into a logical data model, which documents structures of the data that can be implemented in databases. Implementation of one conceptual data model may require multiple logical data models. The last step in data modeling is transforming the logical data model to a physical data model that organizes the data into tables, and accounts for access, performance and storage details. Data modeling defines not just data elements, but also their structures and the relationships between them.Data modeling techniques and methodologies are used to model data in a standard, consistent, predictable manner in order to manage it as a resource. The use of data modeling standards is strongly recommended for all projects requiring a standard means of defining and analyzing data within an organization, e.g., using data modeling:

to assist business analysts, programmers, testers, manual writers, IT package selectors, engineers, managers, related organizations and clients to understand and use an agreed upon semi-formal model that encompasses the concepts of the organization and how they relate to one another
to manage data as a resource
to integrate information systems
to design databases/data warehouses (aka data repositories)Data modeling may be performed during various types of projects and in multiple phases of projects. Data models are progressive; there is no such thing as the final data model for a business or application. Instead a data model should be considered a living document that will change in response to a changing business. The data models should ideally be stored in a repository so that they can be retrieved, expanded, and edited over time. Whitten et al. (2004) determined two types of data modeling:
Strategic data modeling: This is part of the creation of an information systems strategy, which defines an overall vision and architecture for information systems. Information technology engineering is a methodology that embraces this approach.
Data modeling during systems analysis: In systems analysis logical data models are created as part of the development of new databases.Data modeling is also used as a technique for detailing business requirements for specific databases. It is sometimes called database modeling because a data model is eventually implemented in a database.   - Topics:    - See also: Architectural pattern
Comparison of data modeling tools
Data (computer science)
Data dictionary
Document modeling
Enterprise data modelling
Entity Data Model
Information management
Information model
Building information modeling
Metadata modeling
Three-schema approach
Zachman Framework   - References: This article incorporates public domain material from the National Institute of Standards and Technology.   - Further reading: J.H. ter Bekke (1991). Semantic Data Modeling in Relational Environments
John Vincent Carlis, Joseph D. Maguire (2001). Mastering Data Modeling: A User-driven Approach.
Alan Chmura, J. Mark Heumann (2005). Logical Data Modeling: What it is and how to Do it.
Martin E. Modell (1992). Data Analysis, Data Modeling, and Classification.
M. Papazoglou, Stefano Spaccapietra, Zahir Tari (2000). Advances in Object-oriented Data Modeling.
G. Lawrence Sanders (1995). Data Modeling
Graeme C. Simsion, Graham C. Witt (2005). Data Modeling Essentials'
Matthew West (2011) Developing High Quality Data Models   - External links: 
Agile/Evolutionary Data Modeling
Data modeling articles Archived March 7, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
Database Modelling in UML
Data Modeling 101
Semantic data modeling
System Development, Methodologies and Modeling Notes on by Tony Drewry
Request For Proposal - Information Management Metamodel (IMM) of the Object Management Group
Data Modeling is NOT just for DBMS's Part 1 Chris Bradley
Data Modeling is NOT just for DBMS's Part 2 Chris Bradley