Title: Data analysisSummary: Data analysis is the process of inspecting, cleansing, transforming, and modeling data with the goal of discovering useful information, informing conclusions, and supporting decision-making. Data analysis has multiple facets and approaches, encompassing diverse techniques under a variety of names, and is used in different business, science, and social science domains. In today's business world, data analysis plays a role in making decisions more scientific and helping businesses operate more effectively.Data mining is a particular data analysis technique that focuses on statistical modeling and knowledge discovery for predictive rather than purely descriptive purposes, while business intelligence covers data analysis that relies heavily on aggregation, focusing mainly on business information. In statistical applications, data analysis can be divided into descriptive statistics, exploratory data analysis (EDA), and confirmatory data analysis (CDA). EDA focuses on discovering new features in the data while CDA focuses on confirming or falsifying existing hypotheses. Predictive analytics focuses on the application of statistical models for predictive forecasting or classification, while text analytics applies statistical, linguistic, and structural techniques to extract and classify information from textual sources, a species of unstructured data. All of the above are varieties of data analysis.Data integration is a precursor to data analysis, and data analysis is closely linked to data visualization and data dissemination.Sections:   - The process of data analysis: Analysis, refers to dividing a whole into its separate components for individual examination. Data analysis, is a process for obtaining raw data, and subsequently converting it into information useful for decision-making by users. Data, is collected and analyzed to answer questions, test hypotheses, or disprove theories.
Statistician John Tukey, defined data analysis in 1961, as:"Procedures for analyzing data, techniques for interpreting the results of such procedures, ways of planning the gathering of data to make its analysis easier, more precise or more accurate, and all the machinery and results of (mathematical) statistics which apply to analyzing data."There are several phases that can be distinguished, described below. The phases are iterative, in that feedback from later phases may result in additional work in earlier phases. The CRISP framework, used in data mining, has similar steps.   - Quantitative messages: Stephen Few described eight types of quantitative messages that users may attempt to understand or communicate from a set of data and the associated graphs used to help communicate the message. Customers specifying requirements and analysts performing the data analysis may consider these messages during the course of the process.
Time-series: A single variable is captured over a period of time, such as the unemployment rate over a 10-year period. A line chart may be used to demonstrate the trend.
Ranking: Categorical subdivisions are ranked in ascending or descending order, such as a ranking of sales performance (the measure) by salespersons (the category, with each salesperson a categorical subdivision) during a single period.  A bar chart may be used to show the comparison across the salespersons.
Part-to-whole: Categorical subdivisions are measured as a ratio to the whole (i.e., a percentage out of 100%).  A pie chart or bar chart can show the comparison of ratios, such as the market share represented by competitors in a market.
Deviation: Categorical subdivisions are compared against a reference, such as a comparison of actual vs. budget expenses for several departments of a business for a given time period.  A bar chart can show the comparison of the actual versus the reference amount.
Frequency distribution: Shows the number of observations of a particular variable for a given interval, such as the number of years in which the stock market return is between intervals such as 0–10%, 11–20%, etc. A histogram, a type of bar chart, may be used for this analysis.
Correlation: Comparison between observations represented by two variables (X,Y) to determine if they tend to move in the same or opposite directions. For example, plotting unemployment (X) and inflation (Y) for a sample of months. A scatter plot is typically used for this message.
Nominal comparison: Comparing categorical subdivisions in no particular order, such as the sales volume by product code. A bar chart may be used for this comparison.
Geographic or geospatial: Comparison of a variable across a map or layout, such as the unemployment rate by state or the number of persons on the various floors of a building. A cartogram is a typical graphic used.   - Techniques for analyzing quantitative data: Author Jonathan Koomey has recommended a series of best practices for understanding quantitative data.  These include:

Check raw data for anomalies prior to performing an analysis;
Re-perform important calculations, such as verifying columns of data that are formula driven;
Confirm main totals are the sum of subtotals;
Check relationships between numbers that should be related in a predictable way, such as ratios over time;
Normalize numbers to make comparisons easier, such as analyzing amounts per person or relative to GDP or as an index value relative to a base year;
Break problems into component parts by analyzing factors that led to the results, such as DuPont analysis of return on equity.For the variables under examination, analysts typically obtain descriptive statistics for them, such as the mean (average), median, and standard deviation. They may also analyze the distribution of the key variables to see how the individual values cluster around the mean.
 The consultants at McKinsey and Company named a technique for breaking a quantitative problem down into its component parts called the MECE principle. Each layer can be broken down into its components; each of the sub-components must be mutually exclusive of each other and collectively add up to the layer above them. The relationship is referred to as "Mutually Exclusive and Collectively Exhaustive" or MECE.  For example, profit by definition can be broken down into total revenue and total cost. In turn, total revenue can be analyzed by its components, such as the revenue of divisions A, B, and C (which are mutually exclusive of each other) and should add to the total revenue (collectively exhaustive).Analysts may use robust statistical measurements to solve certain analytical problems. Hypothesis testing is used when a particular hypothesis about the true state of affairs is made by the analyst and data is gathered to determine whether that state of affairs is true or false. For example, the hypothesis might be that "Unemployment has no effect on inflation", which relates to an economics concept called the Phillips Curve. Hypothesis testing involves considering the likelihood of Type I and type II errors, which relate to whether the data supports accepting or rejecting the hypothesis.Regression analysis may be used when the analyst is trying to determine the extent to which independent variable X affects dependent variable Y (e.g., "To what extent do changes in the unemployment rate (X) affect the inflation rate (Y)?"). This is an attempt to model or fit an equation line or curve to the data, such that Y is a function of X.Necessary condition analysis (NCA) may be used when the analyst is trying to determine the extent to which independent variable X allows variable Y (e.g., "To what extent is a certain unemployment rate (X) necessary for a certain inflation rate (Y)?"). Whereas (multiple) regression analysis uses additive logic where each X-variable can produce the outcome and the X's can compensate for each other (they are sufficient but not necessary), necessary condition analysis (NCA) uses necessity logic, where one or more X-variables allow the outcome to exist, but may not produce it (they are necessary but not sufficient). Each single necessary condition must be present and compensation is not possible.   - Analytical activities of data users: Users may have particular data points of interest within a data set, as opposed to the general messaging outlined above. Such low-level user analytic activities are presented in the following table. The taxonomy can also be organized by three poles of activities: retrieving values, finding data points, and arranging data points.   - Barriers to effective analysis: Barriers to effective analysis may exist among the analysts performing the data analysis or among the audience. Distinguishing fact from opinion, cognitive biases, and innumeracy are all challenges to sound data analysis.   - Other topics:    - Practitioner notes: This section contains rather technical explanations that may assist practitioners but are beyond the typical scope of a Wikipedia article.   - Free software for data analysis: Notable free software for data analysis include:

DevInfo – A database system endorsed by the United Nations Development Group for monitoring and analyzing human development.
ELKI – Data mining framework in Java with data mining oriented visualization functions.
KNIME – The Konstanz Information Miner, a user friendly and comprehensive data analytics framework.
Orange – A visual programming tool featuring interactive data visualization and methods for statistical data analysis, data mining, and machine learning.
Pandas – Python library for data analysis.
PAW – FORTRAN/C data analysis framework developed at CERN.
R – A programming language and software environment for statistical computing and graphics.
ROOT –  C++ data analysis framework developed at CERN.
SciPy – Python library for data analysis.
Julia – A programming language well-suited for numerical analysis and computational science.   - International data analysis contests: Different companies or organizations hold data analysis contests to encourage researchers to utilize their data or to solve a particular question using data analysis. A few examples of well-known international data analysis contests are as follows:
Kaggle competition, which is held by Kaggle.
LTPP data analysis contest held by FHWA and ASCE.   - See also:    - References:    - Further reading: 
Adèr, H.J. & Mellenbergh, G.J. (with contributions by D.J. Hand) (2008). Advising on Research Methods: A Consultant's Companion. Huizen, the Netherlands: Johannes van Kessel Publishing.  ISBN 978-90-79418-01-5
Chambers, John M.; Cleveland, William S.; Kleiner, Beat; Tukey, Paul A. (1983). Graphical Methods for Data Analysis, Wadsworth/Duxbury Press. ISBN 0-534-98052-X
Fandango, Armando (2017). Python Data Analysis, 2nd Edition. Packt Publishers. ISBN 978-1787127487
Juran, Joseph M.; Godfrey, A. Blanton (1999). Juran's Quality Handbook, 5th Edition. New York: McGraw Hill. ISBN 0-07-034003-X
Lewis-Beck, Michael S. (1995). Data Analysis: an Introduction, Sage Publications Inc, ISBN 0-8039-5772-6
NIST/SEMATECH (2008) Handbook of Statistical Methods,
Pyzdek, T, (2003). Quality Engineering Handbook, ISBN 0-8247-4614-7
Richard Veryard (1984). Pragmatic Data Analysis. Oxford : Blackwell Scientific Publications. ISBN 0-632-01311-7
Tabachnick, B.G.; Fidell, L.S. (2007). Using Multivariate Statistics, 5th Edition. Boston: Pearson Education, Inc. / Allyn and Bacon, ISBN 978-0-205-45938-4